goptfoo(3) - utility functions for command-line option parsing

Build and install:

  AUTOMAKE_VERSION=1.15 AUTOCONF_VERSION=2.69 autoreconf -i
  ./configure [--prefix=...] && make && make install

Once installed, include the library and call the appropriate flagto*
functions. If the user input cannot be parsed, or lies outside the given
limits, an error message will be printed to standard error, and the
process will exit with the EX_DATAERR code (from sysexits(3)).

Consult goptfoo(3) for a list of available functions and example code.


Bugs and feature requests should be directed to:

https://github.com/thrig/goptfoo

though the intent is not to greatly complicate this code, which means no
gettext or the like for fancy internationalized error messages, nor
error handling beyond simply calling err() to bail the process when
things go awry.


COPYRIGHT AND LICENCE

Copyright (C) 2015 Jeremy Mates

Permission to use, copy, modify, and/or distribute this software for any
purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.


HISTORY

Motivated by the need for option processing in C, and the unportability
of the otherwise excellent OpenBSD strtonum(3) function (leaving aside
how to handle floats), and the much boilerplate required to at least
provide a modest barrier to invalid or otherwise malicious input. These
functions at one point littered various scripts, then got moved to
arbitrary *.{c,h} files that were manually included, and finally to this
library. The Churchill quote on doing everything first the wrong way is
much in mind.
